Rising from the smokestacks of
industrial Germany in the late 19th
century, as Europe was beginning to
grapple with the harrowing realities of
conflict and societal upheaval, one
artist dared to confront the raw,
unvarnished truth of the human condition
through his stark, provocative
creations.
Otto Dix, a master of expressionist and
new objectivity movements, as well as a
key figurehead within the style of art
that would later be branded by the Nazis
as degenerative art, emerged as a beacon
of artistic courage and social
commentary in interwar Germany.
His works, marked by their visceral
intensity, dark satire, and
uncompromising morbidity, offer profound
insights into the depths of human
suffering, the fragility of human life,
and the complexities of the human
psyche.
His artistic journey unfolded against a
backdrop of the brutality of World War
I, the volatile Weimar Republic, and the
rise of fascism. Otto Dix, however,
refused to romanticize or sugarcoat
these events. Instead, he wielded his
brush as a scalpel, meticulously
dissecting the human experience and
exposing its often grotesque underbelly.
In this video, we will delve into some
of the most unflinching visions of Otto
Dix, where viewers are confronted not
with idealized heroes or beautiful
landscapes, but with the mangled bodies
of soldiers, the desperation of the
impoverished, and the moral decay of a
nation during this cataclysmic era in
European history.
Here, we will explore his work in depth,
from his jarring subject matter to his
masterful technical execution, which
served as a stark indictment of war,
social inequality, and the darkness
within humanity itself.
If you're new to this channel, a warm
welcome to you. And if you've not done
so already, please be sure to subscribe
and click the notification bell to keep
up to speed with more videos from me on
the weird and wonderful side of the art
world.
Welcome to another video, everyone.
I invite you to explore with me today
the dark and challenging paintings of
Otto Dix.
Otto Dix was born on December 2nd, 1891.
Raised in a fairly modest family, his
father was a mold maker in the iron
foundry, and Dix inherited his strength
of character and steel-blue eyes.
From his mother, a seamstress, he
received a love of music and poetry.
This, unsurprisingly, would lead young
Otto to discover his artistic talent,
especially in drawing, during elementary
school.
At the age of 10, he modeled for painter
Fritz Ahlersmann, and impressed by his
experience in the studio, decided to
become a painter himself.
Many years later, between 1906 and 1910,
he served an apprenticeship with a local
artist Carl Senff. This apprenticeship
provided Dix with a strong foundation in
craftsmanship and technique, honing his
skills in landscape painting,
particularly in oils and pastels.
By 1909, Dix began studying at the
Dresden Academy of Fine Arts. It was
here where a lack of a rigid academic
curriculum allowed him to explore
various artistic movements.
In particular, he developed a keen
interest in the works of the old
masters, meticulously studying their
techniques for creating depth and
luminosity. This fascination would later
manifest in his layered oil paintings,
with influences from Dutch, Italian, and
German Renaissance masters. However,
Dix's artistic development extended
beyond the confines of the academy. The
vibrant art scene within the city of
Dresden had a huge creative output,
regularly hosting large exhibitions and
events that offered him exposure to
contemporary movements, such as
expressionism and post-impressionism.
The raw emotions and bold colors of
these movements resonated with Otto, and
he began to incorporate them into his
own work.
A pivotal moment came in 1913 when Dix
encountered the art of Vincent van Gogh
at a Dresden exhibition. Vincent's use
of color and expressive brushwork
undoubtedly left a lasting impression on
the young artist, who was already
beginning to sell his art for the first
time through selling small portraits and
genre paintings, as well as coloring
photographs.
Dix's life took a significant turn with
the outbreak of World War I in 1914.
Enlisting voluntarily and reportedly
enthusiastically, he served in the field
artillery regiments on the Western
Front.
By the following year, however, the
horrors he witnessed during the war
profoundly influenced his artistic
sensibilities, fostering a deep-seated
skepticism toward authority and a
profound sense of disillusionment.
Needless to say, these experiences that
forever haunted him became a recurring
theme in his works.
Following the war, Dix's return to
Dresden would not be a welcomed one. The
city was nothing short of a shadow of
its former self. No longer a seat of
government, it suffered a huge drop in
income and severe rationing.
During this time, Otto Dix also
gradually became a leading figure in the
new objectivity movement emerging from
the rude awakening and social upheaval
of the postwar period.
New objectivity artists rejected the
emotionalism of expressionism and
embraced a more objective and critical
approach to portraying the world around
them.
Otto's paintings from this period are
characterized by their stark realism,
often depicting the grotesque and
disturbing aspects of society.
During the Weimar Republic, Otto Dix's
art also offered a scathing critique of
social ills like poverty, prostitution,
and political corruption.
He turned his unflinching gaze on the
moral decadence and social inequalities
that plagued German society. Works like
Metropolis depict the seedy underbelly
of urban life. His work was
controversial, but it also garnered him
acclaim.
He was appointed a professor at the
Dresden Academy and received recognition
from his prestigious institutions.
However, with the rise of the Nazi
Party, Dix's art came under attack.
The Nazis deemed his work as degenerate
and banned him from exhibiting.
They confiscated his art from museums
and public collections, and some of his
works were destroyed. He was even
briefly imprisoned in 1939 at the
beginning of the Second World War.
During the Nazi era and after the war
finally came to an end, Otto Dix's art
became more introspective and symbolic.
He explored religious themes, depicting
scenes from the Bible and grappling with
themes of mortality and faith.
While his later work may not be as well
known, it reflects the artist's
resilience and his ongoing exploration
of the human condition.
Throughout the 1950s and 60s, he
traveled the continent far and wide,
where he exhibited his work constantly.
In 1967,
after traveling to Greece, he suffered a
stroke, which paralyzed his left hand.
He later passed away in 1969.
Since his death, Otto Dix remains as one
of the most important German artists of
the 20th century.
His unflinching portrayal of war and
social injustice continues to resonate
with viewers today.
His work serves as a powerful reminder
of the darkness that can reside within
humanity, but also the enduring strength
of the human spirit.
Dix's art stands as a testament to the
importance of artistic freedom and the
responsibility of art to confront
uncomfortable truths.
But that was just a very brief overview.
Let's now take a look in depth at some
of these uncomfortable truths together.
When looking through the early works of
Otto Dix, even if you consider yourself
very familiar with his art, you may
encounter quite a few shocking surprises
along the way.
What's fascinating to see, first of all,
is how frequently he seemed to turn
towards expressionism in those days,
consisting of crude and heavy
applications of paint, as well as how
often he would experiment with many
different media, such as different
paints and surfaces.
But what's shocking, quite plainly and
simply, was his subject matter.
Even before he went off to fight in
World War I, which would spark a great
deal of grim inspiration behind his
later works, many of his paintings from
this period depict incredibly dark and
graphic themes, and even his
self-portraits and landscapes present
themselves with a macabre undertone.
Although it seems many of his paintings
have slipped under the radar over the
years, or perhaps they were never on the
radar to begin with, there is still much
to investigate and explore within this
curious time frame of his art career.
And the first painting I'd like to
explore with you in this video is titled
"The Nun", completed in 1914.
Dix portrays a solitary nun against a
dark cubist style backdrop reminiscent
of the arched halls of a church or
cathedral.
His approach to presenting the central
figure of the nun is far from
conventional. He utilizes distorted and
elongated forms with sharp angles and
paints her skin in a sickly green and
yellow color. The red patches around her
mouth and under her eyes give off the
impression that she's diseased or
rotting away in spite of a somewhat
serene expression on her face, which to
me creates a very uneasy clash of moods.
With the chaos behind her and her
rotting skin, her peaceful smile conveys
a state of acceptance to doom or perhaps
a form of ignorance or denial of the
inevitable.
This is a hallmark of early
expressionism where the artist
prioritizes emotional impact over a
purely realistic portrayal.
Otto Dix also incorporated cubist
elements, especially in his early
period.
To add more to the notion that we
touched upon about blissful denial in
the face of doom, his fragmentation
could symbolize a splintering of faith
or a world on the brink of chaos.
Considering the painting's date of 1914,
the very beginning of World War I.
Some other objects in the painting tend
to grab your attention the longer you
look. On the left, a radiating vulva
shaped form pushes aside the agonized
and bloody Jesus on the cross with what
appears to be a very enlarged crown of
thorns.
The one element of this painting that
seems to puzzle me a bit is a pregnant
woman on the right hand side. Could this
too be an illustration of the anxiety
the artist had on the brink of war?
Perhaps a fear of what is to come for
the mothers of the soldiers now destined
for the battlefield. A fear of what lay
in store for the future generations of a
country.
It's hard to say for sure, but that
seems to be the impression I get.
However, considering that according to
the reports, Otto Dix was very
enthusiastic when enlisting himself to
the war, this theory of mine may not be
entirely accurate. It's very likely that
the artist felt quite differently about
the war at the time.
But there is also the question of
whether or not this painting touches
upon the theme of temptation.
Could this nun be obsessively tempted to
cast aside her devotion to Christ, now
shoved to the upper left hand corner, to
give in to her sexual desires and to
become a mother as hinted by the
dominating symbols of a vulva and a
pregnant woman?
As always in my videos, I'd love to hear
your thoughts about these paintings. So,
if you have a better idea, please let me
and the others know in the comments
below.
Either way, I find this painting
mesmerizingly tangible and gorgeous with
a haunting color palette and quite a
standout concept when compared to his
other works.
"The Nun" currently resides at the
Museum of Modern Art in New York City,
USA.
By the time Otto Dix experienced his
first horrors of the war, it's safe to
say that this impact leaked heavily into
his work by 1915.
Although just one example of many from
this period, "The Dying Warrior",
completed that year, seems to be one of
the most potent in his collection for
quite obvious reasons.
This violent and graphic painting truly
is a shattering portrayal of World War
I's nightmarish realities, throwing the
viewer into the heart of the carnage.
Presented to us as a lone soldier
sprawled lifelessly on the battlefield.
His once proud uniform now a grotesque
mix of dirt and blood.
His face contorted in a silent scream
exhibiting a harrowing mix of pain and
terror.
Dix's use of harsh layers of paints and
distorted proportions emphasizes the
soldier's physical agony and the
dehumanizing effects of the war. The
once proud soldier is reduced to nothing
but a broken and unrecognizable form.
Many historical paintings completed
before 1915
portrayed battles with a sense of
elegant romanticism as if to glamorize
the act of fighting in combat.
But long gone are those notions within
the artwork of Otto Dix. The background
of "The Dying Warrior" reinforces the
utter devastation wrought by war. He
instead presents a desolate wasteland of
churned up earth, blood, and fire.
There's no sign of heroism or glory in
this painting. The harsh crimson color
of the blood, as well as the muted
greens and browns, further exaggerate
the bleakness of the scene, creating a
suffocating atmosphere of despair. This
painting truly is a powerful indictment
of a war's horrific cost. Dix's use of
expressionist techniques in this piece
transcends mere depiction, instead
thrusting the viewer directly into the
soldier's experience.
Although understandably hard to look at,
it's an important stark reminder of the
human cost borne by soldiers on the
front lines. Dix's unflinching portrayal
of suffering in this work serves as a
lasting expression of war, urging
viewers to confront the price of
recklessness and foolhardy bravery in
the face of conflict.
This next painting titled "Ellis",
completed in 1919, is quite an
unsettling yet intriguing style of
expressionist portraiture that I always
find myself coming back to despite the
very limited information that I could
find on this work.
The painting consists of an unknown
woman dressed in traditional clothing of
the early 20th century
who appears to have short brown hair
that blends ominously into the face of
piercing eyes that stare at the viewer
and a rather menacing smile, all of
which seems to be almost hiding behind
the subtle appearance of a veil.
This again creates a clash of unease
with that of beauty as indicated by her
elegant clothes and the beautiful floral
background.
I'm afraid I have to confess that I was
unable to find too much information on
this work. But what makes this portrait
so intriguing to me and why I wanted to
include it in this video is because of
that very mystery of not quite knowing
who this woman is or what the story is
behind it.
Is Ellis a stranger to the artist or a
friend? Or was she a lover?
As we'll come to learn later in this
video, Otto Dix had a fascinating method
of capturing his models in a rather
unflattering way. And here the depiction
of this woman is not only unflattering,
but also downright disturbing.
Whoever she was, it's clear that the
impression that she left on the artist
was a sinister one. Perhaps he is
depicting how this woman, hidden behind
her veil of beauty, has an untrustworthy
or mendacious personality, which adds a
whole other significance to the
appearance of the veil on her hat.
Maybe she was a woman who he once deeply
adored who eventually broke his heart.
But of course, this is all speculation.
The truth is, much like the woman
herself, this painting is shrouded in
mystery. But like I said, that really
does add more to its appeal. And perhaps
that was the intention of this painting
in the first place.
By the 1920s, a significant shift in the
style of Otto Dix's art began to emerge.
More specifically, his paintings became
less expressionist and abstract and more
refined and sharp, igniting the
beginning of his more well-known
collection of paintings that would
engrave his mark in art history. This
would also be the start of his period of
paintings that focused less on the
impact of war in the midst of battle and
more on the aftermath of it to both
himself and the people around him.
The first of his paintings that comes to
mind is "The Match Seller", completed in
1920.
This work undoubtedly offers a stark
portrayal of a war's lasting impact,
forcing viewers to confront the plight
of veterans and the moral decay of the
Weimar Republic.
In terms of its technique, it presents
us with an introduction to Otto Dix's
use of collage, a technique invented by
the cubists that became popular among
the artists of Germany at that time.
This style allowed artists to shift away
from traditional forms of art making and
in favor of more modern and unorthodox
materials.
But of course, the main impact of this
painting, and indeed many other of Dix's
works executed in this style, is a
sobering message of the theme.
The painting centers on a disfigured and
blind veteran, reduced to selling
matches for a meager living. His
homelessness is evident as he sits
directly on the pavement.
The most shocking aspect is his physical
state, a quadruple amputee with dark
glasses, possibly to hide whatever
horrific injuries caused his blindness.
The veteran cries out the phrase,
"Matches, original Swedish matches."
written on the composition using white
lettering.
This brutal depiction leaves no room for
sentimentality.
Here, the artist isn't merely depicting
a man, he's presenting a broken symbol,
a physical embodiment of a war's
destructive power.
The people passing by, seemingly
ignoring the man, are equally as
significant as our central figure here.
A woman with a dog walks by, and the dog
even appears to be lifting its hind leg
to urinate on the man's leg stumps,
adding another layer of terrible
humiliation.
Their indifference emphasizes the
veteran's isolation and the societal
neglect of those who sacrificed the
most. A society that seems more
concerned with its own recovery than
with the well-being of those who made it
possible.
As we'll now see, the crippled,
neglected heroes of World War I were not
just making an appearance once in Otto
Dix's collection.
His potent oil and collage painting
titled Prague Street transcends a mere
street scene that lays bare the physical
and psychological wounds of a nation.
The artist here meticulously constructs
a surreal scene rife with dissonance.
The fractured perspective, achieved
through the use of collage elements,
mirrors the shattered state of German
society.
Through sharp edges and all of these
scattered objects, it reflects a loss of
a unified national identity and the
struggle to rebuild in the wake of
immense devastation.
The foreground figures act as focal
points, their narratives etched with a
harrowing, yet almost humorous detail,
like they're the punchlines of an
incredibly dark joke.
One veteran, seemingly an upper-class
gentleman who has lost his legs,
navigates the chaotic street on a wooden
board with wheels.
His formal attire speaks volumes of how
even the most sophisticated members of
society who served their country are now
reduced to humiliation, struggling to
reintegrate themselves into a culture
that seems to have moved on.
A discarded pamphlet beneath the
precarious wheels, emblazoned with the
phrase "Juden raus", meaning "Jews out"
in English, casts a long, ominous
shadow.
This potent symbol foreshadows the rise
of anti-Semitism that would fuel the
flames of Nazi ideology.
Juxtaposed against this figure is
another veteran, relegated to the
background. His threadbare clothing and
the absence of his arm speaks volumes
about the uneven impact of the war and
the lack of societal support for those
who bore the brunt of the fighting.
Their contrasting situations expose a
society grappling with the human cost of
war, a cost often borne by the most
vulnerable.
Although it seems as spite of the
well-dressed veteran suffering a loss of
his own, he is still more well-off
compared to the veteran sitting on the
streets. One figure is still able to
work and live comfortably, still able to
afford fine clothes, whilst the other is
nothing less than destitute, alone, and
dressed in mere rags.
His unflinching satirical portrayal of
war's devastation and the lasting impact
on individuals continues to be a
relevant subject even today.
The painting, at least for me, serves as
a cautionary tale, a reminder of the
dangers of unchecked nationalism and the
ease with which social and political
forces can exploit the trauma of war.
This masterpiece compels us to confront
the darkness of the past in order to
safeguard the future.
Otto Dix's The Skat Players, also known
as Card Playing War Cripples, is yet
another powerful and disturbing
portrayal of the aftermath of World War
I.
Painted again in 1920, it stands as a
prime example of the New Objectivity art
movement, characterized by its
unflinching depiction of the social and
psychological realities of the time.
The painting features three veterans,
their bodies ravaged by the war in
unimaginable ways that extend far beyond
the physical.
From observing these three figures, we
can see prosthetic looking limbs and
metal plates grafted into the skin of
their faces, which in turn are
horrifically scarred.
Certain limbs are missing altogether,
which makes their act of playing cards
look tragically obscene. Feet now become
hands, and arms now reach from
uncomfortable angles.
But in this piece, these are not mere
injuries, they are constant reminders of
the trauma they endured and the lives
that the battlefield has now consigned
to them.
Here, it's not just a pastime, but a
fragile attempt to recapture a semblance
of normality amidst the wreckage of
their world.
The card game that they are playing,
known as Skat, in itself is very
telling.
As it was a game favored by the Krupp
family, a prominent 400-year-old German
dynasty from Essen, noted for its
production of steel, artillery,
ammunition, and other armaments.
Dix's use of harsh lighting and a
fragmented composition goes beyond mere
aesthetics.
It serves a distinctive purpose,
emphasizing the veteran's disfigurements
and the shattered reality they inhabit.
When I first saw this painting, my
immediate thought was these fragmented
veterans themselves echo the shattered
landscape of their bodies and minds.
The collage elements with newspaper
clippings incorporated into the
background add a layer of documentary
realism.
These fragments become more than mere
decoration, they connect the scenes to
the larger social context, highlighting
the war's impact that extended far
beyond the battlefield.
The Iron Cross on the chest of the
soldier on the right can be interpreted
in multiple ways.
On one hand, it signifies his past
service and heroism. However, juxtaposed
with his horrific injuries, it becomes a
symbol of brutalized patriotism.
Perhaps the Iron Cross can be
interpreted as once a symbol of honor,
now sitting heavy with the weight of
sacrifice and suffering.
The Skat Players is a scathing
commentary of the war. It forces viewers
to confront the physical and
psychological trauma inflicted upon
soldiers, a stark contrast to the
patriotic narratives that dominated
during the war.
Dix is in no way whatsoever presenting
the survivors of the war as heroes, but
plainly and simply as victims, as husks
of their former selves. Soldiers once
celebrated for their bravery are now
reduced to broken men.
The painting compels us to question the
glorification of war.
It practically forces the viewer to
grapple with the horrific reality of
war's aftermath.
A prime example of what exactly the New
Objectivity art movement sought to
achieve, without a single shred of
reservation.
Otto Dix himself, who served in World
War I, was wounded multiple times. His
personal experience must have
undoubtedly fueled the raw emotionality
of this painting. He wasn't just
depicting the physical scars of war, he
was laying bare the emotional wounds
etched deep within himself and countless
others who served alongside him.
The Skat Players is truly a powerful
anti-war statement that transcends the
specificities of World War I.
Most importantly, the painting serves as
a timeless reminder of the devastating
impact of war, not just on nations, but
on the individual lives that are forever
shattered in its wake.
One defining quality of Otto Dix was not
just his social and political
commentary, but also his unique and
bizarrely unsettling technique of
portraiture.
One such example is the one painted in
titled Portrait of the lawyer Dr. Fritz
Glaser, which under close observation is
more than just a depiction of a
prominent lawyer. It's a work infused
with the artistic spirit of its time and
offers a complex portrayal of his
subject.
As is typical of most of his portraits,
he depicts his friends from the
professional classes, doctors, lawyers,
and other notables who were also
interested in the arts in a satirical
and humorously dark caricature style
with pronounced and exaggerated
features.
In this one, Dix shows Dr. Glaser in
front of a snow-covered ornate Dresden
building,
which appears to have been badly damaged
during the war.
He seems to stare directly at the viewer
with a curious expression, a mix of
seriousness and amusement.
In addition to this, Otto Dix doesn't
seem to shy away from displaying the
imperfections of his models, most
notably the rather large nose, and heavy
bags under Dr. Glaser's eyes, and his
sickly pale skin.
This again displays a prime example of
the heart and soul of the New
Objectivity movement.
As opposed to traditional portraiture,
which often aimed to flatter the
subject, here Dix presents Glaser with
unflinching honesty, capturing the
essence of a man rather than the
idealized version.
In many ways, this portrait presents us
with a reflection of a nation in flux as
well.
Like Skat Players, this was created
during the interwar period of Germany, a
period of healing wounds and looming
threats on the horizon.
While Dr. Glaser appears successful from
his elegant and smart attire, there's a
clear hint of unease in this work.
Perhaps the slight amusement on his face
is tinged with cynicism, a reflection of
a world turned upside down.
The background, depicting a snow-covered
Dresden building with a seemingly
shattered facade, could be interpreted
as a metaphor for the fractured state of
German society at the time.
To me, this portrait is a master class
in the New Objectivity's sharp
observation and psychological depth.
Dr. Glaser's complex expression and the
painting's subtle symbolism offers a
unique window into the life of a
prominent German figure and the
anxieties of a nation struggling to
rebuild itself.
Otto Dix's Mother with Child, painted in
1921, goes beyond a mere depiction of
motherhood.
It's a cold representation of the social
and personal costs of World War I,
delivered through a brutal, yet
hauntingly beautiful portrayal.
The title, Mother with Child, evokes a
traditional genre, one typically
brimming with tenderness and
sentimentality.
Here, however, Otto Dix subverts this
expectation entirely.
The woman's gaunt appearance and pale
complexion is a strong departure from
the idealized presentation of
motherhood.
It seems she and her child are victims
of poverty and famine, perhaps even
reduced to wandering the streets in
search of money, food, and shelter.
Her vacant, sunken eyes speak of a
profound loss, a hollowness that mirrors
the emptiness left by the war. It
wouldn't surprise me if she was once the
wife of a soldier who has since fallen
in battle, leaving her and her child
alone.
As for the child itself, with its
abnormally shaped head and pallid
expression, to me upon first glance, it
becomes a sort of symbol of the future
burdened by the previous generation's
trauma, innocent and completely at the
mercy of the tattered world they are now
being raised in.
The muted color palette, devoid of
warmth and vibrancy, reflects the
environment, both physical and
emotional, left by the war.
The bleak walls of the buildings and
absence of familiar comforts in the
background create a sense of hollowness,
reflecting the emptiness in the mother's
eyes.
This environment truly underscores the
struggle for survival, a stark contrast
to the idealized versions of nurturing
homes traditionally associated with
paintings of motherhood.
Mother with Child could also be
interpreted as a commentary on the
breakdown of societal structures in the
wake of the war. The woman,
traditionally seen as the caregiver and
nurturer, is herself depleted and unable
to efficiently provide for her
offspring.
This could well have been a common sight
for the artist during the interwar
years. The traditional pillars of the
family and community, essential for a
nurturing environment, are now
fractured, leaving individuals like this
mother and child adrift in a harsh and
unforgiving world.
As I said, this painting is not just a
depiction of a single mother and child,
it's a portrayal of a generation
grappling with physical and emotional
scars, a society of people struggling to
rebuild from the ashes.
The painting's emotional weight lies in
its subversion of the traditional theme,
using the familiar image of motherhood
to deliver a harsh, yet unforgettable
message about the true cost of war.
Painted in 1923,
Prostitutes presents us with yet another
pretty unflattering portrayal of the
postwar characters he would come across
in his recovering country.
Similar to his earlier painting, the
faces of these women are repulsive,
exaggerated, with the one closest to us
painted with a deceptive grin and a
shade of dark crimson red on her face.
The one behind looks off to the distance
dismissively and vacantly.
It's almost as if Otto Dix is portraying
her as abnormally dull-witted and
stupid.
Despite their efforts to be alluring to
their clients, the artist here, in
keeping to his distinctive technique,
depicts them as quite the opposite.
This would not be the only time he would
engage with this theme in his art,
either.
His painting, completed 2 years later,
for example, titled Three Prostitutes in
the Streets, depicts two ladies of the
evening in search of customers.
A third walks by with her nose in the
air, giving off the impression that she
is married into money and enjoys the
trappings of wealth.
She also carries a dog, a toy dog. It is
a prop that points to her as a kept
woman, or if you will, a plaything.
These sex workers are depicted with a
high level of self-confidence.
It seems they are forthright with the
regard to their profession, while the
woman with her nose aloft seems to be
less honest about hers.
Although in his 1923 painting, the
symbolism is a little more ambiguous and
mysterious, the general impression that
Otto Dix felt towards prostitutes in his
country at the time is very obvious.
Unapologetically, he points out the
irony and shows the exchange for what it
is, the promise of affection for
desperate men being completely dishonest
with many ulterior motives behind it.
It is less clear as to whether or not
this was in direct relation to the
postwar environment of his time, but
again, it wouldn't surprise me if
prostitution in Weimar Germany was
becoming more common as job
opportunities, especially for widows of
fallen soldiers, were by then very few
and far between for the middle to
working class.
By 1924, Otto Dix would return to his
first-hand experiences as a machine
gunner on the Western Front within his
art with a series of around 50 etchings
titled Der Krieg, meaning the war in
English.
These many etchings stand as a harrowing
indictment of war's brutality.
In this series, which was published in
Berlin and was inspired by Dix's
experience viewing Francisco Goya's
Disasters of War engravings in Basel, he
frequently used the ravaged landscape
itself as a metaphor for the shattered
worldview of the war generation. Barren
battlefields, skeletal trees, cadaverous
bodies, and twisted metal becoming
recurring motifs.
The shattered environment reflects
psychological devastation wrought by the
war, leaving viewers with a sense of
profound alienation.
While Otto Dix's etchings are undeniably
rooted in realism, they also incorporate
elements of the grotesque and satirical.
This can be seen in images of soldiers
with bizarre features, nightmarish
visions, and scenes of civilian
indulgence set against the backdrop of
the battlefield carnage. This use of
grotesque serves to further emphasize
the absurdity and inhumanity of war.
There are so many gut-wrenching examples
to choose from that they almost deserve
their own video. With some etchings
presenting a scene so blunt and
harrowing that it needs no explanation
as to what it entails, and others left
more ambiguous and ominous that require
the viewer's own investigation.
Undoubtedly, though, the one etching in
this collection that sticks out the most
and captures the most intrigue is the
one titled Stormtroopers Advance Under a
Gas Attack.
Dix's use of distorted figures,
particularly the ghoulish gas masks, is
central to the artwork's message.
The masks rob the soldiers of their
individuality,
transforming them into faceless
entities, made to look almost like
ghosts or demons with the disturbing and
alien appearance of the masks.
This highlights the dehumanizing effects
of war, where soldiers become mere
instruments or machines of violence.
Their humanity is sacrificed for the
sake of conflict.
Even the shell tree on the right looks
just as menacing as any of the modern
weapons used in combat due to its
pointed limbs representing a demonic
pitchfork. Some of these soldiers look
like they've been snagged on a line of
barbed wire representing the many ways
in which a soldier's body came under
attack.
The artist, again, doesn't shy away from
the human cost of war. While no dead
bodies are explicitly shown, the
implication is clear.
Before moving on to the next analysis, I
think it's worth taking a brief silent
moment of just observing and
contemplating on these war etchings.
We always hear tangible tales of what
happened during this awful time in human
history, but very rarely do we get to
see it in the way that Otto Dix did.
Here, he offers us the chance to see
through his own eyes what kind of
horrors took place, and why we should
never forget how senseless and wasteful
war truly is.
So, while looking through these, think
to yourself, could you really endure
what he endured?
Does it make you think you might take
your precious life and freedoms for
granted? Just what would your role be
within the midst of such unthinkable
terror?
At the end of the 20s, the artwork of
Otto Dix was continuing to develop an
increasingly realistic style of
painting.
By now, his layers of oil paints were
becoming thinner and more delicate,
adopting a manner of painting very
similar to the old masters, where he
would apply these thin layers of paint
over its tempera underpainting to add
more depth and vibrance to the finished
result.
Much of his style of painting we've
already seen in his portraits, but with
each one he would complete, his level of
realism was reaching new heights.
Yet, he wouldn't stray away from his
interest in over-exaggerating the
features of his models, and wouldn't
just merely capture their appearance.
Otto Dix's 1926 painting, Portrait of a
Journalist Sylvia von Harden, is a
multifaceted masterpiece that perfectly
exemplifies a portrait that goes beyond
a simple likeness.
While capturing the physical features of
von Harden, a prominent journalist and
poet, Otto Dix portrays her as an
embodiment of the unconventional spirit
of the Weimar Republic era in Germany.
Sylvia von Harden occupies the center
stage, seated in an unadorned corner,
perhaps in a cafe. Her attire, a bold
red and black checkered dress, is a
statement in itself. The geometric
pattern speaks to the contemporary
trends and the changing social norms of
the time.
Her posture is defiant. She sits with
her legs crossed, a gesture that hints
at self-assuredness and a rejection of
societal constraints on feminine
behavior.
The inclusion of a cigarette and a glass
in her hands further reinforces this
image of a woman comfortable in a world
not traditionally associated with
femininity.
Von Harden was a vocal part of this new
generation. By choosing her as his
subject, Otto Dix elevates her to the
status of an icon, a woman who not only
documented the changing times, but also
actively participated in shaping them.
It's been recorded that Otto Dix painted
this portrait after seeing von Harden in
the street and exclaiming, "Quote, I
must paint you. I simply must. You
represent an entire epoch."
She was reportedly amused and responded,
"Quote, so you want to paint my
lackluster eyes, my ornate ears, my long
nose, my thin lips? You want to paint my
short legs, my big feet, things that can
only frighten people and delight no
one?"
Little did she know that this was
precisely the attributes that the artist
was drawn to, claiming that she was a
perfect image for a society that was
less concerned about a woman's outward
appearance than her psychological state.
Quite simply, this work is a commentary
on the universal human experience of
navigating societal change and defying
expectations.
The boldness of her subject, the raw
style that captures both vulnerability
and strength,
it serves as a reminder of the power of
art to capture a moment in time,
celebrate individuality, and spark
conversations that echo through
generations.
This period of the tail end of the 20s
were not just mark Otto Dix's evolution
in how he painted, but also what he
painted.
His work slowly began to shift from just
one canvas to make large installments
consisting of more than one frame, known
in art terminology as a triptych.
One such example would be his triptych
painted between 1927 and 1928.
Standing not as a monument to the
marvels of a modern city, but as an
existential criticism of its social and
moral decay, titled Metropolis.
The triptych's format itself is a
powerful statement. Divided into three
distinct panels, Metropolis denies the
viewer a unified perspective of the city
and its activities when the sun goes
down.
From the first panel on the left, we can
already see the artist returning to his
powerful theme of capturing the
country's neglect of war veterans.
Still dressed in their green uniform,
one who has lost both his legs hobbles
on crutches, whilst another soldier lies
in the street ahead of him.
All the while, scantily clad showgirls
or prostitutes seem utterly repulsed by
them, or at the very least completely
unsympathetic towards them.
They appear to be more preoccupied with
what is taking place in the central
panel, a ballroom party, which in stark
contrast to the dark street is brimming
with bright lights and vibrant colors.
Although on the surface this party seems
jovial and alive with loud music and
dancing, the atmosphere instead, at
least from the perspective of Otto Dix,
is one of lurid debauchery.
Many of these characters are given very
unflattering features, and the
instruments appear disproportionately
large.
Most crucially though, this party in the
central panel is a world apart from what
is happening on the streets.
One world is one of poverty and social
difficulties, whereas the other world of
the metropolitan nightlife is luxurious,
oblivious, and excessive.
On the right-hand side panel, we see yet
more women with thick makeup, disturbing
faces, and provocative clothing pushing
their way past yet another veteran
amputee, reduced to that of a beggar,
and seen as nothing more than a nuisance
to the women passing by.
What's interesting to see is that one of
these women is dressed in a way that the
artist once again symbolically
represents as a vulva, much like the nun
painting that we saw in the beginning.
This leads us to what the core theme of
this entire triptych is truly about, as
explained by the art professor Marsha
Meskimmon. "Quote, the war veterans are
shown weakened in every way by the
aggressive sexuality of the Weimar
woman.
Both the economic and sexual bargaining
power rests with the demonized [__] of
modernity."
End quote.
Each scene feels isolated, a fragmented
window into a world where a sense of
community and belonging has been
shattered.
From a certain point of view, the
chaotic organization reflects the
fractured state of German society in the
aftermath of the war. Further amplifying
this unease, Dix employs distorted
perspectives. Buildings appear to lean
precariously, their lines warped and
unstable. This unsettling technique
creates a sense of a city on the verge
of collapse, mirroring the anxieties of
a society grappling with political and
economic turmoil.
Another well-known triptych of Otto Dix,
and well regarded as one of his greatest
masterpieces, was completed between 1929
and 1932,
titled The War.
This work is a monumentally disturbing,
yet powerful anti-war statement. A
product once again of Otto Dix's own
harrowing experiences in World War I,
the piece utilizes a unique blend of
religious iconography and brutal realism
to depict the horrors of war.
This time, Dix breaks the mold by using
a format reminiscent of an altarpiece,
with four panels instead of just the
usual three. This evokes a sense of
reverence, forcing a viewer to confront
the war as a kind of grotesque religion.
The large central panel acts as the
focal point, while the flanking panels
and the smaller predella offer a
narrative sequence.
The left panel depicts soldiers marching
out at dawn, symbolizing the naive
enthusiasm and innocence lost in the
trenches.
The use of murky and muted colors, in
stark contrast to the rest of the
triptych, accentuates the impending loss
of idealism.
In the center, we're presented with the
most distressing section of the work,
which showcases a ravaged battlefield
littered with mutilated bodies, tattered
objects, and rotting remains. It's very
possible that these corpses belong to
the soldiers we saw on the left, with
this apocalyptic wasteland showing the
terrible aftermath.
The right panel shows traumatized
soldiers returning from the battlefield,
their faces etched with despair, more
like ghosts than men, as emphasized by
their pale white complexion, which may
have been a deliberate means to show how
no matter how little physical injuries a
survivor may receive, their mental state
is utterly destroyed when fighting in
this war.
One figure, a possible self-portrait of
Otto Dix, drags a wounded comrade,
highlighting the physical and
psychological burdens.
The expression of a soldier's face is
particularly noteworthy. Otto portrays a
range of emotions here, from vacant
numbness to raw terror, creating a
powerful sense of collective trauma.
Finally, in the bottom panel, known as a
predella, the viewer is offered a
haunting image of fallen soldiers
peacefully resting in a dugout, the only
semblance of solace in the entire
triptych.
Even here, however, the piece is
fragile. The soldiers are depicted in
various stages of decomposition,
a reminder of the impermanence of life
and the lingering effects of war.
In the true spirit of the New
Objectivity movement, Dix's imagery is
devoid of sentimentality, forcing
viewers to confront the brutal reality
of war. The use of oil and tempera paint
on wood, much like the grand paintings
of the old masters, adds a heightened
sense of immediacy and emotional
intensity.
The meticulous detail in the central
panel, particularly in the depiction of
wounds and decay, further amplifies the
disturbing nature of the scene. Its
portrayal of war's savagery serves as a
striking reminder of the human cost of
such mindless violence.
The decade of the 1930s began with a
flourish for Otto Dix. Having
established himself as a leading figure
in the New Objectivity movement, he
secured a professorship at the Dresden
Academy of Art in 1927.
His most significant work, The War
Triptych, continued to garner wider
attention, and 1931 marked the zenith of
Dix's artistic recognition in Germany.
He was elected to the prestigious
Prussian Academy of Arts in Berlin and
participated in a major exhibition at
the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
However, by the beginning of 1933,
Germany faced a pivotal moment, as Adolf
Hitler had now risen to power, and
extreme fascism under the guise of
promising change to the social and
economic climates of a struggling
country was now taking root.
This would also be a crucial and
unfortunate turning point for Otto Dix.
The Nazis turned their eyes towards the
arts to see what would boost or hinder
their propaganda, and saw his works in
particular, of satire and brutally
honest depictions of society and war, as
a threat to their cause. They would
condemn his so-called New Objectivity
art with the unflattering label of
degenerative art, which would stick over
the generations following this period.
They would also forcibly dismiss Otto
Dix from his teaching position at the
Berlin Academy. This radical act upon
the artist, many experts believe, to be
the catalyst for another one of his most
famous satirical paintings, known as The
Seven Deadly Sins, completed in 1933.
This oil and tempera painting is not
just religious allegory. It's an
unapologetic critique of the social and
political climate that, by this time,
was allowing fascism to flourish.
The painting depicts a grotesque cast of
characters, each embodying a deadly sin.
For example, the figure of sloth or
laziness, depicted in the center, is a
skeletal figure with a scythe dancing
mindlessly, signifying how laziness
allows societal ills to fester.
If you study closely, you may even
notice that his posture is symbolic,
with his outstretched arms and scythe
forming a sort of swastika.
The old, gaunt, hunchbacked woman in the
bottom left is believed to represent the
sin of greed. Perched on her back is a
tiny white figure, often interpreted as
Hitler due to the mask he's wearing and
the addition of a mustache after the
war, which was originally left more
ambiguous. This figure is said to
represent envy, consuming and riding on
the back of greed.
On the right-hand side, we see a manic
and almost deranged-looking woman
exposing her breast, unsurprisingly
believed to represent lust.
The horns-raging monster in the
background appears to represent anger.
The giant, swollen head with its ears
blocked, and which some observers
consider having an anus for a mouth,
represents the sin of vanity.
Which leaves us to the figure next to
vanity, a chubby-faced figure wearing a
clay mask with a wide-open mouth,
possibly representing the sin of
gluttony.
There seems to be very clear and
understandable reasons why the addition
of a Hitler mask was only added to the
figure of envy after the war, the more
you research about the artist's life
during this period.
As explained on arthive.com,
quote, "It is not surprising that in the
letters of Otto Dix, which began to be
published only in 2010, there is
particularly no mention of his attitude
to Hitler, the new government, and the
new order.
Most likely, any dangerous mention was
the reason for the addressee to destroy
the letter.
The only source of information is his
painting."
After the search and dismissal, Dix and
his family left to live in the village
in the old castle which belonged to his
wife Martha's ex-husband.
He borrows money from his art dealer to
buy a stove and conduct electricity, and
begins to create neutral landscapes,
smiling girls, and flowers to earn some
money.
The dancing skeleton in The Seven Deadly
Sins is depicted in such a position that
the pattern of his clothes forms a
swastika, and this, the artist said
later, reproached his compatriots for
their laziness and passivity, which led
to the Nazis.
But the main character of the picture
is, of course, envy riding on greed,
firmly taking and ruling it. The
smallest, insignificant, but the most
important of sins wears the mask of
Hitler.
In the first sketch, it's quite obvious
it is easy to recognize by the whiskers.
But holding onto the picture, Dix did
not dare to portray this detail, which
gives too obvious a portrait likeness.
The picture of the mustache was not
until 1945,
after the end of the Second World War,
nothing could prevent the artist from
making these two final strokes instead
of all burned letters."
End quote.
With this in mind, The Seven Deadly Sins
stands as a very historically important
work. It's practically the only
biographical accounts we have of the
artist's feelings at the time outside of
his letters that would have constantly
been intercepted by the Nazis.
But it serves as a strong reminder of
the dangers of unchecked vices and
societal apathy. Otto Dix's courage in
criticizing the Nazi regime, even with
veiled symbolism, stands as a testament
to the power of art to speak truth to
power.
The following year of 1934, as the
looming threat of a Second World War was
encroaching, Otto Dix continued to make
powerful political statements in his
work, in spite of his increasing
limitations.
One such painting he completed that year
would explore not just the horrors of
war this time, but also the cycle of
life itself, titled The Triumph of
Death.
Again, there is sadly not that much
information surrounding this painting
compared to his other works. However,
with just one quick glance, the
overarching theme becomes bitterly
clear.
Across the painting, we can see
different stages that we come to
experience throughout our lives, told
mostly from the artist's perspective.
On the right, we can see a young man
embracing a nude woman. What they
symbolize becomes obvious when we can
see an innocent toddler on the ground
just in front of them, making each of
these figures collectively represent our
primordial desire to procreate.
Above the child is a maid laboring in
her chores, and above her is a proud
German soldier.
Perhaps these two figures again
represent the collective symbolism of
what typical adult life looked like for
most people their age in Germany at the
time.
Sat on the ground just left of the young
couple is a decrepit and elderly figure
looking up in horror at what his loyal
barking dog seems to have noticed, too,
which is the dominating and terrifying
presence of death.
The skeletal figure wields a scythe,
much like the typical depiction of the
Grim Reaper, and wears a crown to
symbolize as the title of the painting
also indicates his terrible dominion
over all. How there is nowhere to hide
for anyone. All who are born are doomed
to die.
The old figure and his dog seem to be
the only ones who notice death, perhaps
indicating that when we reach old age,
we become ever more aware of death's
presence.
Though interestingly, the blade of
death's size seems to almost wrap
entirely around the neck of the soldier.
Maybe this could represent how those who
proudly walk into battle are just within
death's terrible grasp.
The completely oblivious stance of a
soldier makes this notion all the more
tragic as he considers himself
courageous and valiant. Here the artist
could very well be depicting him as
nothing but ignorant of the reality of
death and how close it is to cutting him
down.
Unsurprisingly, following the completion
of his painting, the Nazis banned this
painting from being exhibited and in a
way it represents another death that
Otto Dix himself probably saw on the
horizon, which was the death of his
artistic freedom.
In the same year this painting was
completed, he was forced to join the
Nazi government's Reich Chamber of Fine
Arts. Over the latter end of a decade
and throughout the years of World War
II, what little creative freedoms he had
left would only dwindle until eventually
being imprisoned by his own countrymen
when the war officially begun.
In 1939, the declaration of war and the
invasion of German soldiers across
Europe echoed violently across the
world. World War II had now commenced.
As for Otto Dix, the paranoia of the
Nazi regime was massively underscored
during this time when Dix was briefly
imprisoned on suspicion of plotting
against Hitler. This incident marked a
low point for the artist with many of
his paintings destroyed and hardly any
new works emerging through the course of
the war, highlighting the ever-present
threat he faced under the Nazi rule.
During this time, however, he would also
complete arguably one of his most
important self-portraits that captured
his ever-growing maturity as an artist,
titled Self-Portrait with Palette before
Red Curtain, completed in 1942.
In this scene, he's directly facing the
viewer while in other portraits he's
normally positioned in profile.
Whilst he is engaged in the act of
painting, presumably the portrait
itself, the dark and ominous view of the
Alps can be seen outside the window in
the distance.
This choice of combining the very warm
and inviting environment of the artist
with the apocalyptic world outside in
the background could very likely
highlight his state of mind at the time.
Art seems to be serving him as his only
place of refuge, never leaving his side
even as the world outside seems to be in
chaos, full of conflict and destruction.
The artist was soon conscripted into the
Volkssturm. He was captured by the
French at the end of the war and held
prisoner until 1946.
Not wasting time, he quickly picked up
the paintbrush again. Though here we
would also notice a shift in the style
of art very reminiscent of his earliest
works.
The paintings from this period, right up
until his final paintings before his
death, appear to lean more towards
expressionism once again with thick
layers of paints and more surreal
applications of color.
A lot of these paintings focused on the
themes of post-war suffering, religious
allegories and biblical scenes such as
his 1949 painting titled The
Resurrection that seems to be
representing Christ emerging from his
tomb after his crucifixion.
One of his most strangest paintings from
this period though, at least in my
opinion, is his 1946 painting titled
Masks as Ruins.
The color palette is dark and muted,
reinforcing the grim mood of the
painting which evokes a sense of death
and desolation.
There are occasional flashes of red
which could symbolize blood, violence or
anger.
The title Masks as Ruins is a powerful
metaphor. Masks can represent the
facades we present to the world, but
here they are broken and ruined,
suggesting a deep psychological trauma
that cannot be hidden.
The faces of these masks can be seen as
representing the shattered identities of
those who experienced the war both
physically and mentally.
His 1948 painting titled Ecce Homo with
likeness behind barbed wire is also very
raw and telling.
Here the artist portrays himself behind
barbed wire, covered in sores and
sitting in his own urine, a potent
symbol of imprisonment and oppression
used in concentration camps.
The title Ecce Homo, Latin for behold
the man, is a phrase uttered by Pontius
Pilate in the Bible when presenting
Jesus Christ to the crowd before his
crucifixion.
By inserting himself into the scene,
Otto Dix equates the suffering of Christ
with the suffering of those persecuted
by the Nazis and the wider devastation
of war.
Otto Dix eventually returned to Dresden
where he remained until 1966.
During this time, recognition of his
work began to climb once again in both
parts of the then divided Germany.
In 1959, he was awarded the Grand Merit
Cross of the Federal Republic of Germany
and in 1950, he was unsuccessfully
nominated for the National Prize of the
GDR.
He received the Lichtwark Prize in
Hamburg and the Martin Andersen Nexø Art
Prize in Dresden to mark his 75th
birthday in 1967.
That same year he received the Hans
Thoma Prize and was then made the
honorary citizen of Gera.
In 1968, he received the Rembrandt Prize
of the Goethe Foundation in Salzburg.
Before his death in 1969, he completed a
rather touching painting titled
Self-Portrait with Marcella.
Marcella, according to what I could
research, was one of his granddaughters
and it seems that within the final years
of his life, Otto Dix had turned away
from the diabolical nature of war and
injustice to a more enriching and
wholesome happiness that he sought to
express in his art.
An earlier painting completed in 1965
also features Marcella with his other
granddaughter Nana in the garden.
An article I came across on lamperts.com
for this piece detailed perfectly the
technique Otto Dix adopted during his
final decades.
Quote,
"Both the joy found in color and the
semi-abstract articulation of the
painting's forms as well as the
rediscovery of lithography realized in
large and luminous sheets are typical of
the artist's late work. He himself had
summarily described the transformation
from his wash technique to an alla prima
painting in the 1940s.
Spontaneity, no more meticulous
articulation of details, no calculating
and formalizing ideal composition, no
space, but an explicit new primacy of
color. These factors now define his work
on the basis of a radically altered
perception.
The figural paintings are now
increasingly joined by likeness as well
as self-portraits, landscapes and floral
still lives. What is captivating about
the work is not just a combination of
likeness and garden motif as well as the
relationships between the colors, but
also the thematic parallel between the
motifs of the open flower and the
children's faces which Dix has lovingly
captured and juxtaposed.
End quote.
These touching moments between the
artist and his family that he expressed
in his final works leave a powerful
impression, a reflection of his own
mortality and the passing of time.
It seems in his final days he no longer
wished to explore the darkness, but
instead focused on his happiness and his
relationships.
After enduring so much both on the
battlefield and on the streets of a
country that not only disillusioned him,
but also oppressed him, abandoned him
and imprisoned him, he may have died
suddenly and unexpectedly, but did not
do so in vain.
It's somewhat comforting to know that
the dark and war-torn images he left
behind were not his only legacy, as
important and eye-opening as they are,
but he also left behind a tender part of
his soul that can be witnessed in these
final creations, giving us an additional
valuable lesson of never taking our
loved ones for granted,
never letting the darkness of life
totally dominate us, even when the
triumphant, laughing, scythe-wielding
bringer of death looms over us, and to
instead pass on with love in our hearts
and a smile on our face.
Thank you so much for watching. I hope
you found this video informative and I
hope you have a thirst for exploring
more works of this incredibly important
historical artist.
As always, it's a shame I could not
include more of his paintings in this
video, but don't let that stop you from
making your own journey through his art.
This video is more to give you a
starting point to observe the paintings
of the artists I feature on this
channel, but it's important to have your
own experience.
And as always, I look forward to reading
through your own interpretations below
in the comments.
Before I go, I'd like to take a moment
to share some artwork sent to me by one
of my lovely viewers in my end of video
feature called artist corner.
And today's featured bonus artist is
Valentine, an outsider artist who goes
by the pseudonym Punk Rock Ghosty on
Instagram. Valentine started drawing
more studiously when in middle school.
An art teacher leaving the school at the
end of the year took note of him despite
never being in her class, only hanging
around in the room during lunch and free
periods, and gave him a large stack of
mostly empty sketchbooks. He also had
another who allowed students to freely
create with whatever materials were
available. This period introduced him to
painting with acrylics, finding paints
really advanced his journey of
improvement from what he describes as
cartoony Tumblr-esque character drawing
in pencil.
Although he never officially received
formal education in arts, over the years
Valentine has described being driven to
create art by compulsion, always seeking
new ways to improve his technique and
style.
However, Valentine tends to find his own
style is something that eludes and
surprises even himself. He names many
inspirations and influences that fuel
his love and creativity for art, such as
Vincent van Gogh, Pierre Bonnard,
Caravaggio, Frida Kahlo, Edward Hopper,
James Ensor, and René Magritte, just to
name a few.
To quote him directly on his own
reflections of his work, quote,
"I feel like my work always ends up
being sad. I'm not sure why. I wish it
weren't at times, but alas, it ends up
being what my hands continue to end up
painting. But still, my aim is trying to
create beautiful paintings. I hope it's
something I get closer to. I would like
to say for me, one of the most important
elements in a painting is color. I see
the world in all its color and find that
I'm trying more and more to put down the
color I see and translate that with the
tools and paints I have on hand. My main
tools for finishing painting are palette
knives. One I even made myself with a
bit of metal off a ruler and a sewing
pin for precise detail work.
End quotes.
Valentine's first official series is
called The Ballads, in which he explains
he's heavily working on depicting scene
paintings. He tells me he's always
wanted to paint those Renaissance
paintings where they have all the
characters together telling a story. For
example, his painting titled The Dance
was a sentiment he had to finally start
doing so after some point in the
COVID-19 pandemic. Most people who
personally knew Valentine think of these
to be self-portraits,
but he would say otherwise. Quote,
"I am simply the only model I have to
paint to tell the stories I wish to
tell. I am currently in the process of
working on my largest, most complicated
piece yet in the theme of Pieta,
inspired by Bouguereau.
End quotes.
I can't help but share a lot in common
with Valentine in the way that he sees
the world. I too find myself drawn to
color around me and see much in it that
can prompt such profound and
indescribable complex feelings. Perhaps
that's why I'm drawn like a magnet to
his art, especially when seeing how
beautifully he blends these tones
together to create such an otherworldly
image. His thick textured layers of
paint have so much care and attention
put into them, which I feel really
emphasizes his mastery over the medium.
I think he has something truly unique to
offer here, and it would mean a lot to
me if you could go and check out more of
his hard work.
Please head over to his Instagram by the
link you see on screen or click the link
in the description to show him some
love.
If you too are an artist and would like
to potentially be featured in an
upcoming video, please send me an email
with a description about you and your
art, as well as examples of your work,
of course, to blinddweller@gmail.com
or send me a message on Instagram.
Finally, I'd like to give a huge thank
you to the ever-supportive dwellers on
Patreon and the channel members tab.
Here's a shout-out to all of my top
paying donators.
Molotail,
Dave MC,
Eric LaMarca,
Tyler Butler,
Vlad Siv,
Grape, Miles Z,
Paul Pereira,
The Neon Goblin 24,
Equatemark,
Ken B,
Lee Flowers, Calvin Kai,
Kaiser,
Carol H, and Charlie Sanchezy.
That's a wrap for today. See you in the
next video soon. Keep being creative
and bye for now.